---
title: Mom&rsquo;s Secret Sauce for Success
date: 2011-05-03

aside: This post was originally published on the Balcom agency blog. I have syndicated it here for archival purposes. "Read it on the Balcom blog &raquo;":http://balcomagency.com/blog

layout: post
type: blog
---
I owe every accomplishment I have ever achieved to three things my mom
instilled in me from a young age. She was relentless, frustating at
times, but looking back I know it was out of a deep love for me and my
future.

### Always do your best

Most of the time my grades were good. But I never got in trouble for bad
grades, unless they were a result of not trying. Every time I brought
home a paper with a bad grade, she'd ask me, "Could you have gotten a
better grade?" Most of the time, the answer was yes and I knew I had
been lazy. If I really had done my best, my mom praised me for the
effort I put in, and encouraged me to prepare for next time. As long as
I did my best, she was satisfied.

Now, in my professional life, I never feel like I've done a satisfactory
job unless I've done my best.

### Never be satisfied with the status quo

I was a rockstar speller when I was in gradeschool. I'd look at a word,
write it out once or twice, and then it would be in my head forever (or
at least until the next spelling test). My mom caught on to my
abilities, and wouldn't let me stop at the lists of 5-letter words my
teachers gave me.

To this day, I try to push myself into uncomfortable territory. The only
way to better yourself is to step outside your comfort zone, and now I
have twenty-some years of practice thanks to my mom.

### Be a life-long learner

Our family vacations were primarily about spending time together, but
they were always educational. We wouldn't just stop and look at the
sights to see, we would read every sign and soak up all the information
we could get. Even our destinations were educational. I learned all
about [wildlife](http://www.desertmuseum.org/),
[caves](http://www.nps.gov/cave), [the Cold
War](http://www.titanmissilemuseum.org/), and [cutting-edge scientific
research](http://www.b2science.org/) on our vacations.

Every once in a while, when I feel like I'm just drifting through life,
I'll go learn something new and it gives me just the pick-me-up I need.

### Thanks, mom!

Thanks, mom, for always encouraging to do my best, to not be satisfied
with the status quo, and to be a life-long learner. Happy mother's day!
