---
title: Mom&rsquo;s Keys to Success
date: 2011-05-02

aside: This post was originally published on the Balcom agency blog. I have syndicated it here for archival purposes. "Read it":http://balcomagency.com/blog on the Balcom blog.

layout: post
type: blog
---
I owe every accomplishment I have ever
achieved to three things my mom instilled in me from a young age. She
was relentless, frustating at times, but looking back I know it was out
of a deep love for me and my future.

### Always do your best

Most of the time my grades were good. But I never got in trouble for bad
grades, unless they were a result of not trying. Every time I brought
home a paper with a bad grade, she'd ask me, "Could you have gotten a
better grade?" Most of the time, the answer was yes and I knew I had
been lazy. If I really had done my best, my mom praised me for the
effort I put in, and encouraged me to prepare for next time. As long as
I did my best, she was satisfied.

### Never be satisfied with the status quo

I was a rockstar speller when I was in gradeschool. I'd look at a word,
write it out once or twice, and then it would be in my head forever (or
at least until the next spelling test). My mom caught on to my
abilities, and wouldn't let me stop at the lists of 5-letter words my
teachers gave me.

### Be a life-long learner

Our family vacations were primarily about spending time together, but
they were always educational. We wouldn't just stop and look at the
sights to see, we would read every sign and soak up all the information
we could get. Even our destinations were educational. I learned all
about [wildlife](http://www.desertmuseum.org/),
[caves](http://www.nps.gov/cave), [the Cold
War](http://www.titanmissilemuseum.org/), and [cutting-edge scientific
research](http://www.b2science.org/) on our vacations.

Thanks mom, for always encouraging to do my best, to not be satisfied
with the status quo, and to be a life-long learner. Happy mother's day!
