---
layout: post
date: 2005-10-14
title: "Philemon"
subtitle: "An analysis"
---

In Philemon we see a beautiful analogy of what Christ has done for us. Onesimus,
a runaway slave, has committed a great offense against his master, Philemon,
just as we have committed a great offense against God.  1 Timothy 2:5 tells us
that  “there is one God, and there is one mediator between God and men, the man
Christ Jesus.”[^1]  In the same way that Jesus is the mediator between God and
men, Paul assumes the position of mediator between Onesimus and Philemon. He
pleads for Onesimus’ debt to be placed on himself, and by the grace of Philemon,
Onesimus is not only restored as a slave but welcomed back as a brother in
Christ.[^2] Philemon demonstrates “Christian ethics in action.”[^3]

**Verse 1**. Paul opens up this epistle with a standard greeting. Basically,
“From: Paul and Timothy, To: Philemon, Apphia, and Archippus.” He refers to
Philemon as a beloved fellow worker in some capacity, but “whether as a
preacher, or deacon, or a private Christian, cannot be ascertained.”[^4] Paul
did not need to assert his apostolic authority because of the epistle’s personal
nature[^5] as opposed to one written to an entire body of believers in one city:
his appeal to Philemon is not based on his apostolic authority but on his
personal relationship with Philemon as a brother in Christ.[^6] He simply
referred to himself as “a prisoner for Christ Jesus”[^7] in this verse.  This is
the only one of his epistles in which he did so.[^8] Timothy himself most likely
did not take part in the composition; however, his name is mentioned because he
agreed with the words that Paul wrote.[^9]

**Verse 2**. Apphia was probably Philemon’s wife. Archippus was closely
associated with both Philemon and Apphia; he was at the very least a close
friend, but it is also possible that he was either their son or a physical
brother of Philemon.[^10] Paul also includes the church that meets in Philemon’s
home in the recipients list.

**Verse 3**. The salutation in Philemon is “almost identical in wording to the
greeting in six of his other epistles (Rom., 1 and 2 Cor., Gal., Eph., Phil.);
the other six epistles have only slight variations.”[^11] Diebler mentions the
importance of the word order in this phrase. “Grace” appears before “peace”
simply because grace is the prerequisite to peace: a right relationship towards
God must be in place before peace can be present, and that right relationship
towards God can only be set into place by the grace of God.[^12]

**Verse 4**. Paul had a habit of mentioning people and churches _by name_ in his
prayers.[^13] Paul’s prayer life is an excellent example of how and how often we
ought to pray. His circumstances were of no consequence; he continued to pray
for his fellow believers’ spiritual needs on a regular basis regardless of his
present situation.[^14]

**Verse 5**. From whom did Paul hear of Philemon’s faith in Christ and love
towards the saints? Most likely Onesimus himself, who, after his conversion,
would be delighted to expound on Philemon’s positive attributes.[^15] Regardless
of the identity of this news-bearer, the chiastic structure of the statement
implies that the “love for the saints grows out of faith in Christ.”[^16]

**Verse 6**. It is Paul’s prayer that those who see Philemon’s good works would
be convinced that his faith was true. Barnes quotes Calvin, saying:

  > What, therefore, did he desire for Philemon? That his faith, expressing
  > itself by good fruits, might be shown to be true and not vain... For
  > although faith has its proper seat in the heart, yet it communicates itself
  > to men by good works.[^17]

And not only for Philemon: Paul prayed this prayer for himself and all other
Christians as well. The Message renders it this way: “And I keep praying that
this faith we hold in common keeps showing up in the good things we do, and that
people recognize Christ in all of it.”[^18]

**Verse 7**. Paul can rest at peace and is joyful because he knows that the
hearts of the saints are in the good hands of one who loves them: Philemon. The
word rendered “joy” in the English Standard Version is rightfully so, even
though the majority of Greek manuscripts read _charin;_[^19] many conclude,
including Calvin himself, that the proper word, found in a great deal of
manuscripts as well,[^20] is _charan_. A simple one-letter mistake is one that
would be an easy one to make.[^21]

**Verses 8-9**.  Paul’s position as an apostle was great enough, his
relationship with Christ deep enough, and his faith bold enough that he could
command Philemon to do what the Lord required of him. “He claims the right to
command on two grounds, that he is an elder, and that he is a prisoner for
Christ.”[^22] However, Paul does not want to have to assert this authority, so
he appeals to Philemon in love as brother in Christ.

**Verse 10**. Now that Paul has stated the grounds for his appeal, he reveals
the purpose for his appeal, that is the treatment of Onesimus upon his return.
“Philemon’s love, demonstrated to all the saints, should now include
Onesimus.”[^23] When Paul writes of becoming Onesimus’ father, he obviously
means this not in a literal but a figurative sense, where Paul is referring to
the fact that he was the one to lead Onesimus to Christ, and has grown very
close to him.

**Verse 11**. Onesimus’ name means “profitable,” but up to this point in time,
Onesimus had not been useful to anyone at all, even his master Philemon. But
now, as a sanctified child of God through Christ, he is not only profitable to
Philemon but to Paul as well, living up to his name.[^24]

**Verses 12-13**. Paul, immediately after unveiling that his purpose in writing
this letter was to appeal on Philemon’s behalf, he “passes the problem on to
Philemon...[before he had]  opportunity to think over Paul’s request.”[^25]
Onesimus is coming, whether or not Philemon approves, and he is coming on his
own accord. There is no way that Paul could have forced him to go to Colosse,
and there is no evidence in the text that Paul compelled him to go.[^26] In
fact, Paul even says that he would have been glad to keep Onesimus with him in
Rome. Onesimus may have borne the letter himself.[^27]

**Verse 14.** Paul is a smooth talker. However, it was not his jurisdiction as
to whether Onesimus stayed or went. He could have convinced Philemon to let
Onesimus stay in Rome with him, but instead he spared taking advantage of his
relationship with Philemon.[^28] “This is drawn from the general rule, that no
sacrifices are acceptable to God but those which are freely offered.”[^29]
Philemon had no obligation to do as Paul requested, even though he should
probably take his advice.**

**Verses 15-16**. The argument is now made that though Onesimus left Philemon as
“thy unfaithful slave”[^30], he is now returning not only as a slave, but as a
brother in Christ. Notice Paul does not ask for Onesimus’ release, only that he
be treated now as a brother in the Lord Jesus Christ, because their relationship
in the Lord supersedes their relationship on earth. He will now be with Philemon
forever. The length of time that Onesimus was absent from Philemon’s household
(an “hour” in the Greek) was minuscule “compared with the everlasting devotion
henceforth binding him to his master.”[^31]

**Verse 17**. Here Paul starts to get more personal in his intercession on
Philemon’s behalf. He basically says (in quite more professional terms) “You’re
not my friend if you don’t treat him like you would me.”  But the term “partner”
holds so much more value than simply a companion: if Philemon considered himself
like-minded to Paul, if he considered himself as sharing “common principles,
common attachments...common hopes...same principles of religion... [or] the same
hope of heaven,”[^32] then he should treat Onesimus as he would Paul. Of course,
he has liberty to request this because he has established his argument
incredibly well, and the fact that Onesimus is now a follower of Christ puts
them on a level playing field.

**Verse 18**. If there is anything that Onesimus still owed Philemon after
returning to his master, Paul asks for the debt to be placed on his shoulders.
Not only does “this generous act [compare] in a small way with Christ’s
substitutionary work on the cross”[^33] (nothing any mere human can do could
ever compare with Christ!), but it demonstrates the values and ethics that
should characterize believers in action.

**Verse 19**. This epistle, unlike other letters that Paul wrote, was
hand-written by Paul. It was customary to have a scribe record your words for
you, but Paul specifically says, “I, Paul, write this with my own hand,”[^34]
which can only mean that he wrote out the letter himself. This was in part due
to the personal nature of the letter and his favorable disposition towards
Philemon[^35], and in part because Paul was in essence signing a contract with
Philemon that he would assume any debt that Onesimus had accumulated. He is
hoping that Philemon will acquit Onesimus for the wrongs done to him, but he is
prepared to “undertake to make good all loss by an evil servant to his
master.”[^36] Paul is willing to repay Onesimus’ debt _in spite of_ the fact
that Philemon had been converted to Christ through Paul’s ministry (“your owing
me even your own self”[^37])

**Verse 20**. If Philemon welcomed and restored Onesimus when he returned to his
master, then Paul’s heart would be refreshed in the Lord, just as the saints in
verse seven. In his letter here Paul uses another play on words using Onesimus’
name.[^38] “The Greek word translated ‘benefit’ is the root of the one
translated ‘Onesimus.’ One writer rendered this clause ‘Let me get you help as
well as get you Helpful.’”[^39]

**Verse 21**. Paul was confident that Philemon would do what he asked. So
confident, in fact, that he says that he _knows_ that Philemon will do _even
more_ than what has been asked. This really shows us what Philemon’s character
is like.  This was also a final prompt imploring Philemon to act graciously and
mercifully on Onesimus’ behalf. Henry noticed a truth about humanity when he
stated, “Good thoughts and expectations of us more strongly move and engage us
to do the things expected from us.”[^40] When we are complemented and are highly
regarded, we are more likely to do things worthy of complements and high regard.

**Verse 22**. “Prepare a guest room for me.”[^41] Prepare a guest room for me?
Paul is in prison! This probably reminded Philemon that he had been praying for
Paul’s release. “How could Philemon pray for Paul’s release and yet refuse to
release Onesimus?”[^42] He couldn’t—at  least not without losing some dignity!

**Verses 23-24** contain Paul’s “shout-outs” for friends of Philemon who wished
to encourage him through this letter.

**Verse 25**. Christ, in His grace, has “blessed us [believers]...with every
spiritual blessing in the heavenly places.” Philemon was given those blessings;
therefore he should shower Onesimus with grace all the more.

## Works Cited

- Bailey, Mark L., and Thomas L. Constable. The New Testament Explorer. Nashville: Word, 199. 497-502.
- Barnes, Albert. "Philemon." Albert Barnes' Notes on the Bible. Electronic.
- Boa, Kenneth D. "Philemon Introduction." The Open Bible. Nelson.
- Brown, Jamieson F. "Philemon 1:1-25." Commentary Critical and Explanatory on the Whole Bible. Electronic.
- Calvin, John. "Philemon." Commentary on Timothy, Titus, Philemon. Electronic.
- Clarke, Adam. "Philemon." Adam Clarke's Commentary on the Bible. Electronic.
- Constable, Thomas L. Notes on Philemon. Sonic Light, 2005. Dr. Constable's Bible Study Notes. 7 Oct. 2005 \<http://www.soniclight.com\>.
- Diebler, Edward C. "Philemon." The Bibile Knowledge Commentary. Ed. John F. Walvoord and Roy B. Zuck. Colorado Springs: Cook Communications Ministries, 2004. 769-775.
- Henry, Matthew. "Philemon 8-25." Matthew Henry's Commentary on the Whole Bible. Electronic.
- Peterson, Eugene H. The Messge REMIX. Colorado Springs: NavPress, 2003. 2180-2181.
- Van Dine, James M. Philemon. Sonic Light. James Van Dine's Bible Analyses. 7 Oct. 2005 \<http://www.soniclight.com/vandine/\>.

Scripture quotations are from The Holy Bible, English Standard Version, copyright ©2001 by Crossway Bibles, a division of Good News Publishers. Used by permission. All rights reserved.

[^1]:	Holy Bible, English Standard Version. 1 Tim 2:5

[^2]:	Boa, pp. 1232-1233.

[^3]:	Bailey, p. 497.

[^4]:	Barnes, v. 1.

[^5]:	Constable, p. 3.

[^6]:	Van Dine, p. 2.

[^7]:	ESV, Phm. 1.

[^8]:	Deibler, p. 770.

[^9]:	Constable, p. 3.

[^10]:	Constable, p. 3-4.

[^11]:	Diebler, p. 771.

[^12]:	Diebler, p. 771.

[^13]:	Barnes, v. 4.

[^14]:	cf. Eph. 1:16; Phil. 1:4; Col. 1:3.

[^15]:	Barnes, v. 5.

[^16]:	Constable, p. 4.

[^17]:	Barnes, v. 6

[^18]:	Peterson,  Phm. 6.

[^19]:	Calvin, Phm. 7.

[^20]:	Barnes, v. 7.

[^21]:	Calvin, Phm. 7.

[^22]:	Calvin, Phm. 9.

[^23]:	Diebler, p. 772.

[^24]:	Constable, p. 7.

[^25]:	Diebler, p. 772-3.

[^26]:	Barnes, v. 12.

[^27]:	Diebler, p. 773.

[^28]:	Diebler, p. 773.

[^29]:	Calvin, v. 14.

[^30]:	Clarke, v. 15.

[^31]:	Brown, v. 15.

[^32]:	Barnes, v. 17.

[^33]:	Diebler, 774.

[^34]:	ESV, Phm. 19.

[^35]:	Barnes, v. 19.

[^36]:	Henry, 12th Arg.

[^37]:	ESV, Phm. 19.

[^38]:	The first play on words using Onesimus' name (“Useful”) is found in verse 11.

[^39]:	Constable, p. 10.

[^40]:	Henry, 14th Arg.

[^41]:	ESV, Phm. 22.

[^42]:	Diebler. p. 774.
